README.md, before:

# Bayesian estimation of diffusivity spectra in diffusion MRI

This repo contains work in progress for estimating diffusivity spectra of normal and tumor tissue compartments of prostate gland diffusion MRI for 63 patients (relating to [Langkilde et al](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28718517/) study), using bayesian methods for quantifying the diffusivity spectrum, defined by the inverse Laplace Transform.

All derived data is free from HIPAA PHI and repo should not contain any sensitive patient information.

## Motivation

There is great interest to quantify the spectrum of diffusivities that underlie the observed diffusion signal decay; separate tissue compartments can be identified by their spectral peaks. This spectrum is defined by the inverse Laplace transform, but unfortunately this transform is very sensitive to noise omnipresent in diffusion MRI. We present a Bayesian method of inverse Laplace transform that uses Gibbs sampling to provide spectra along with an estimate of the noise related to uncertainty in the spectra; this uncertainty information is valuable in interpreting the results. We show preliminary results estimating distributions on diffusivity spectra for normal and tumor tissues.

## Methods

Gibbs Sampler + Mean-Field Variational Bayes (TBD).

## Quick Install & Setup

1. Clone the repo and `cd` into it.
2. Install in editable mode (requires pip ≥ 21.3):
   ```sh
   pip install -e .
   ```
   (or use `uv pip install -e .` if you use uv)

## Structure & Data

- **Source code:** `src/spectra_estimation_dmri/`
- **Curated data (JSON, etc.):** in `src/spectra_estimation_dmri/data/` (distributed with the package, accessed via `importlib.resources`)
- **Generated output (plots, CSVs, etc.):** in top-level `output/` (auto-created, gitignored)

## Usage

Run simulations or tests with:
```sh
python -m spectra_estimation_dmri.testing.simulation
```
## Project Structure

- All source code is under `src/`
- Utilities are in `src/utils/`
- Models and samplers are in `src/models/`
- Tests and simulations are in `src/testing/`

## Environment Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.13 or later
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) package manager
- Homebrew (for macOS users)
- SuiteSparse (required for cvxopt)

For macOS users, install SuiteSparse using Homebrew:
```bash
brew install suite-sparse
```

### Setting up the Python environment

1. Create and activate a virtual environment:
```bash
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```

2. Install all dependencies (from `pyproject.toml`):
```bash
uv pip install -e .
```

3. (macOS only, for cvxopt):
If you have issues with `cvxopt`, you may need to specify SuiteSparse paths:
```bash
CFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/include" LDFLAGS="-L/opt/homebrew/lib" uv pip install cvxopt
```

### Data

The `processed_patient_dict.json` (output of `process_data.py`) contains the following derived information for all 62 patients of the [Langkilde et al](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28718517/) study:
- `new01`: patient identifier
  - `roi1`: region of interest on diffusion MRI image segmented by radiologists
    - `signal_values`: array of 15 signal values (average over ROI)
    - `b_values`: corresponding 15 b-values
    - `v_count`: number of voxels in ROI (used for average signal values)
    - `anatomical_region`: 4 anatomical regions in prostate gland were segmented - `tumor_tz_s1`, `tumor_pz_s1`, `normal_pz_s2`, `normal_tz_s3`. In cases where no matching anatomical region was found, regions are marked `Neglected!`.
  - `roi2`: ... (max 3 ROIs per patient)
 
`patient_gleason_grading.csv` and `prostate_rois.csv` contain gleason grades that were attributed by pathologists to certain segmented lesions and an overview of which region and tissue type (tumor vs normal) was segmented, respectively.

## Troubleshooting Import Errors

- If you see errors like `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'src'`, make sure you installed the package with `pip install -e .` from the repo root.
- Do **not** add `src` to your `PYTHONPATH` manually; the editable install handles this.
- Make sure every directory in `src/` (and `src/` itself) contains an `__init__.py` file (even if empty).
- If you use an IDE, make sure it recognizes the root of the repo as the project root.

Commit message:

refactor(src): update config mgmnt and dataset loaders with hydra and pydantic

README.md, after:

# TODO: rename repo to medical inference (to highlight versatility and generalizabilty...)
# TODO: if our biomarker is not better than ADC that's good enough as a result ... be honest aobut results ... science is about truth nothing!
# Purpose
Develop an end-to-end inference pipeline for finding and validating image-based cancer biomarkers, that are relevant and useful for clinical practice.

What kind of experiments do I want to do?
1) Understand and find the best conditioned matrix U:
   1) How does our U matrix look (how bad is it)? Condition number, Numerical rank
   2) How can we phrase the problem in a way that it get's easier (e.g. measured by decreasing condition number)?

maybe it make sense to design an end-to-end inference pipeline...(e.g. the discretization of d directly depends not only on the condition number of U but also of the priors that I am using as regularization of the NNLS problem...)

all depends also on the kind of metrics I am using...

Can you adapt all data and non-data classes in the two python files, so that I can use them easily for the following 4 experiments? Please outline usage in these four experiments as well. 

# Experiment1 - design matrix analysis (s=UR, Uij = exp(-bj*Di) laplace kernels)
Here I want to make the ill-conditioned design matrix U as least ill-conditioned as possible to make the problem as simple as possible. I am thinking of trying out different diffusivity discretizations (e.g. log transform) and maybe different b value vectors (although i am not sure if that makese sense...). In any case helpful tools for optimizing for an ideal conditioned matrix, could include condition number, numerical stability, singular value spectra, matrix heatmaps.

# Experiment2 - prior selection for prob model
I am modelling the inverse laplace transform as a non-negative multivariate normal (hence truncated) and want to test various probabilistic models. In experiment 2 I want to solve the non-negative least square problem to compute the mode of R (map estimate). I want to benchmark various priors (e.g. dirichlet prior, truncated normal prior, laplace prior, uniform prior ...) to see how well they regularize the mode computation and help with making the solution stable under noise for various noise realizations and keep the accuracy. I need to compute and store various R_mode vectors for various noise realizations and varying regularizers / priors.

# Experiment3 - approximative inference method benchmarking with simulation
Here I want to compare various samplers and also variational bayes to approximate the full posterior over R. I am thinking of computing the bayesian posterior mean and the variance to fully characterize the approximate spectrum and maybe (if you deem it necessary) also keep the raw samples for the sampling approaches. I want to benchmark these approaches in terms of accuracy and efficiency in approximating the true R spectrum and need to compute and store at least various means and variances for changing approximative inference methods, noise and spectra etc.


# Experiment4 - biomarker creation for gleason grade group differentiation and tumor vs normal differentiation
Finally I want to use the best performing combination of the above experiments, i.e. the best conditioned matrix, with the best prior / regularizer for the mode R, and the most efficient and accurate approximative inference method to use the diffusivity spectrum to predict gleason scores and differentiate between tissue types. The goal is to outperform ADC and justify this mathematically and computationally more intensive approach, as well as find the best possible way of using the computed features as a cancer biomarker (incl. benchmarking various feature combinations on the small dataset that we have).


# Bayesian estimation of diffusivity spectra in diffusion MRI

This repo contains work in progress for estimating diffusivity spectra of normal and tumor tissue compartments of prostate gland diffusion MRI for 63 patients (relating to [Langkilde et al](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28718517/) study), using bayesian methods for quantifying the diffusivity spectrum, defined by the inverse Laplace Transform.

All derived data is free from HIPAA PHI and repo should not contain any sensitive patient information.

## Motivation

There is great interest to quantify the spectrum of diffusivities that underlie the observed diffusion signal decay; separate tissue compartments can be identified by their spectral peaks. This spectrum is defined by the inverse Laplace transform, but unfortunately this transform is very sensitive to noise omnipresent in diffusion MRI. We present a Bayesian method of inverse Laplace transform that uses Gibbs sampling to provide spectra along with an estimate of the noise related to uncertainty in the spectra; this uncertainty information is valuable in interpreting the results. We show preliminary results estimating distributions on diffusivity spectra for normal and tumor tissues.

## Methods

Gibbs Sampler + Mean-Field Variational Bayes (TBD).

## Quick Install & Setup

1. Clone the repo and `cd` into it.
2. Install in editable mode (requires pip ≥ 21.3):
   ```sh
   pip install -e .
   ```
   (or use `uv pip install -e .` if you use uv)

## Structure & Data

- **Source code:** `src/spectra_estimation_dmri/`
- **Curated data (JSON, etc.):** in `src/spectra_estimation_dmri/data/` (distributed with the package, accessed via `importlib.resources`)
- **Generated output (plots, CSVs, etc.):** in top-level `output/` (auto-created, gitignored)

## Usage

Run simulations or tests with:
```sh
python -m spectra_estimation_dmri.testing.simulation
```
## Project Structure

- All source code is under `src/`
- Utilities are in `src/utils/`
- Models and samplers are in `src/models/`
- Tests and simulations are in `src/testing/`

## Environment Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.13 or later
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) package manager
- Homebrew (for macOS users)
- SuiteSparse (required for cvxopt)

For macOS users, install SuiteSparse using Homebrew:
```bash
brew install suite-sparse
```

### Setting up the Python environment

1. Create and activate a virtual environment:
```bash
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```

2. Install all dependencies (from `pyproject.toml`):
```bash
uv pip install -e .
```

3. (macOS only, for cvxopt):
If you have issues with `cvxopt`, you may need to specify SuiteSparse paths:
```bash
CFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/include" LDFLAGS="-L/opt/homebrew/lib" uv pip install cvxopt
```

### Data

The `processed_patient_dict.json` (output of `process_data.py`) contains the following derived information for all 62 patients of the [Langkilde et al](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28718517/) study:
- `new01`: patient identifier
  - `roi1`: region of interest on diffusion MRI image segmented by radiologists
    - `signal_values`: array of 15 signal values (average over ROI)
    - `b_values`: corresponding 15 b-values
    - `v_count`: number of voxels in ROI (used for average signal values)
    - `anatomical_region`: 4 anatomical regions in prostate gland were segmented - `tumor_tz_s1`, `tumor_pz_s1`, `normal_pz_s2`, `normal_tz_s3`. In cases where no matching anatomical region was found, regions are marked `Neglected!`.
  - `roi2`: ... (max 3 ROIs per patient)
 
`patient_gleason_grading.csv` and `prostate_rois.csv` contain gleason grades that were attributed by pathologists to certain segmented lesions and an overview of which region and tissue type (tumor vs normal) was segmented, respectively.

## Troubleshooting Import Errors

- If you see errors like `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'src'`, make sure you installed the package with `pip install -e .` from the repo root.
- Do **not** add `src` to your `PYTHONPATH` manually; the editable install handles this.
- Make sure every directory in `src/` (and `src/` itself) contains an `__init__.py` file (even if empty).
- If you use an IDE, make sure it recognizes the root of the repo as the project root.
